# Rates of cerebral protein synthesis and memory formation during sleep

If protein synthesis during sleep is required for sleep-dependent memory consolidation, we might expect rates of cerebral protein synthesis (rCPS) to increase during sleep in the local brain circuits that support performance on a particular task following training on that task. In this study (Reference 1), in order to measure circuit-specific brain protein synthesis during a daytime nap opportunity, we used the L-[1-11C]leucine positron emission tomography (PET) method with simultaneous polysomnography. We trained subjects on the visual texture discrimination task (TDT). This was followed by a nap opportunity during the PET scan, and we retested them later in the day after the scan. The TDT is considered retinotopically specific, so we hypothesized that higher rCPS in primary visual cortex would be observed in the trained hemisphere compared to the untrained hemisphere in subjects who were randomized to a sleep condition. Our results indicate that the changes in rCPS in primary visual cortex depended on whether subjects were in the wakefulness or sleep condition but were independent of the side of the visual field trained. That is, only in the subjects randomized to sleep, rCPS in the right primary visual cortex was higher than the left regardless of side trained. Other brain regions examined were not so affected. In the subjects who slept, performance on the TDT improved similarly regardless of the side trained. Results indicate a regionally selective and sleep-dependent effect that occurs with improved performance on the TDT.

## Measurement of rates of cerebral protein synthesis (rCPS) in human subjects

The L-[1-11C]leucine PET method for measurement of regional rates of cerebral protein synthesis (rCPS) in human subjects is based on the in-vivo autoradiographic method for measurement of rCPS in animals (Reference 2). The method utilizes dynamic PET scanning with concurrent arterial blood sampling. A kinetic modeling approach is used to account for the dilution of the specific activity of the tissue precursor amino acid pool for protein synthesis with amino acids, largely unlabeled, that come from the steady state breakdown of protein in the tissue; these amino acids are a significant source of leucine in brain. The method was validated in rhesus monkeys (Reference 3). In the first human studies the method was demonstrated to produce low variance and highly reproducible measures of rCPS (Reference 4). Early studies utilized region of interest kinetic model analyses; a voxel-based approach was subsequently developed (References 5 and 6, see Reference 6's supplement for modification of voxel-based algorithm). In addition to reducing the effects of tissue kinetic heterogeneity on calculations of rCPS, the voxel-based approach allows the construction of parametric rCPS images.

The scanning procedure used in the originally developed method proved too difficult for subjects with intellectual disabilities to tolerate without sedation. To make it easier for these participants to tolerate the procedure while awake, modified methods were developed and validated to shorten the scanning interval (Reference 7) and substitute venous for arterial blood sampling (Reference 8).

Included in the current dataset are L-[1-11C]leucine 4D PET emission images, co-registered MR images, blood sampling data, and parametric rCPS images.

## References

1. Picchioni, D., Schmidt, K. C., McWhirter, K. K., Loutaev, I., Pavletic, A. J., Speer, A. M., Zametkin, A. J., Miao, N., Bishu, S., Turetsky, K. M., Morrow, A. S., Nadel, J. L., Evans, B. C., Vesselinovitch, D. M., Sheeler, C. A., Balkin, T. J., & Smith, C. B. (2018). Rates of cerebral protein synthesis in primary visual cortex during sleep-dependent memory consolidation, a study in human subjects. Sleep, 41(7). [https://doi.org/10.1093/sleep/zsy088](https://doi.org/10.1093/sleep/zsy088)

2. Schmidt, K. C., Cook, M. P., Qin, M., Kang, J., Burlin, T. V., & Smith, C. B. (2005). Measurement of Regional Rates of Cerebral Protein Synthesis with L-[1- 11 C]Leucine and PET with Correction for Recycling of tissue amino acids: I. Kinetic Modeling Approach. Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism, 25(5), 617–628. [https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.jcbfm.9600067](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.jcbfm.9600067)

3. Smith, C. B., Schmidt, K. C., Qin, M., Burlin, T. V., Cook, M. P., Kang, J., Saunders, R. C., Bacher, J. D., Carson, R. E., Channing, M. A., Eckelman, W. C., Herscovitch, P., Laverman, P., & Vuong, B.-K. (2005). Measurement of Regional Rates of Cerebral Protein Synthesis with L-[1- 11 C]leucine and PET with Correction for Recycling of Tissue Amino Acids: II. Validation in Rhesus Monkeys. Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism, 25(5), 629–640. [https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.jcbfm.9600066](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.jcbfm.9600066)

4. Bishu, S., Schmidt, K. C., Burlin, T., Channing, M., Conant, S., Huang, T., Liu, Z., Qin, M., Unterman, A., Xia, Z., Zametkin, A., Herscovitch, P., & Smith, C. B. (2008). Regional Rates of Cerebral Protein Synthesis Measured with l -[1- 11 C]Leucine and PET in Conscious, Young Adult Men: Normal Values, Variability, and Reproducibility. Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism, 28(8), 1502–1513. [https://doi.org/10.1038/jcbfm.2008.43](https://doi.org/10.1038/jcbfm.2008.43)

5. Tomasi, G., Bertoldo, A., Bishu, S., Unterman, A., Smith, C. B., & Schmidt, K. C. (2009). Voxel-Based Estimation of Kinetic Model Parameters of the l -[1- 11 C]Leucine PET Method for Determination of Regional Rates of Cerebral Protein Synthesis: Validation and Comparison with Region-of-Interest-Based Methods. Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism, 29(7), 1317–1331. [https://doi.org/10.1038/jcbfm.2009.52](https://doi.org/10.1038/jcbfm.2009.52)

6. Veronese, M., Bertoldo, A., Tomasi, G., Smith, C. B., & Schmidt, K. C. (2018). Impact of tissue kinetic heterogeneity on PET quantification: case study with the L-[1-11C]leucine PET method for cerebral protein synthesis rates. Scientific Reports, 8(1), 931. [https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-18890-x](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-18890-x)

7. Tomasi, G., Veronese, M., Bertoldo, A., Beebe Smith, C., & Schmidt, K. C. (2018). Effects of shortened scanning intervals on calculated regional rates of cerebral protein synthesis determined with the L-[1-11C]leucine PET method. PLOS ONE, 13(4), e0195580. [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0195580](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0195580)

8. Tomasi, G., Veronese, M., Bertoldo, A., Smith, C. B., & Schmidt, K. C. (2019). Substitution of venous for arterial blood sampling in the determination of regional rates of cerebral protein synthesis with L-[1- 11 C]leucine PET: A validation study. Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism, 39(9), 1849–1863. [https://doi.org/10.1177/0271678X18771242](https://doi.org/10.1177/0271678X18771242)
