# Measurement of rates of cerebral protein synthesis (rCPS) in human subjects

The L-[1-11C]leucine PET method for measurement of regional rates of cerebral protein synthesis (rCPS) in human subjects is based on the in vivo autoradiographic method for measurement of rCPS in animals (Reference 1). The method utilizes dynamic PET scanning with concurrent arterial blood sampling.   A kinetic modelling approach is used to account for the dilution of the specific activity of the tissue precursor amino acid pool for protein synthesis with amino acids, largely unlabeled, that come from the steady state breakdown of protein in the tissue; these amino acids are a significant source of leucine in brain.  The method was validated in rhesus monkeys (Reference 2). In the first human studies the method was demonstrated to produce low variance and highly reproducible measures of rCPS (Reference 3).  Early studies utilized region of interest kinetic model analyses; a voxel-based approach was subsequently developed (References 4 and 5).  In addition to reducing the effects of tissue kinetic heterogeneity on calculations of rCPS, the voxel-based approach allows the construction of parametric rCPS images.

The scanning procedure used in the originally developed method proved too difficult for subjects with intellectual disabilities to tolerate without sedation.  To make it easier for these participants to tolerate the procedure while awake, modified methods were developed and validated to shorten the scanning interval (Reference 6) and substitute venous for arterial blood sampling (Reference 7).

Included in the current dataset are L-[1-11C]leucine 4D PET emission images, co-registered MR images, blood sampling data, and parametric rCPS images for the following studies:

- [Effects of propofol anesthesia on rates of cerebral protein synthesis](#effects-of-propofol-anesthesia-on-rates-of-cerebral-protein-synthesis)
- [Rates of cerebral protein synthesis and memory formation during sleep](#rates-of-cerebral-protein-synthesis-and-memory-formation-during-sleep)
- [Rates of cerebral protein synthesis in stages of sleep](#rates-of-cerebral-protein-synthesis-in-stages-of-sleep)
- [Rates of cerebral protein synthesis in subjects with fragile X syndrome](#rates-of-cerebral-protein-synthesis-in-subjects-with-fragile-x-syndrome)

References:

1. Schmidt KC, Cook MP, Qin M, Kang J, Burlin TV, Smith CB (2005) Measurement of regional rates of cerebral protein synthesis with L-[1-11C]leucine and PET with correction for recycling of tissue amino acids: I. Kinetic modeling approach. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 25:617 628.
2. Smith CB, Schmidt KC, Qin M, Burlin TV, Cook MP, Kang J, Saunders RC, Bacher JD, Carson RE, Channing MA, Eckelman WC, Herscovitch P, Laverman P, Vuong B K (2005) Measurement of regional rates of cerebral protein synthesis with L-[1-11C]leucine and PET with correction for recycling of tissue amino acids:II.  Validation in rhesus monkeys. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 25:629 640.
3. Bishu S, Schmidt KC, Burlin TV, Channing MA, Conant S, Huang T J,  Liu Z H,  Qin M, Unterman A, Xia Z, Zametkin A, Herscovitch P, Smith CB (2008) Regional rates of cerebral protein synthesis measured with L-[1-11C]leucine and PET in conscious, young adult men: normal values, variability, and reproducibility.  J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 28:1502 1513.
4. Tomasi G, Bertoldo A, Bishu S, Unterman A, Beebe Smith C, Schmidt KC (2009) Voxel based estimation of kinetic model parameters of the L-[1-11C]leucine PET method for determination of regional rates of cerebral protein synthesis: validation and comparison with region of interest based methods.  J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 29:1317 1331.
5. Veronese M, Bertoldo A, Tomasi G, Smith CB, Schmidt KC (2018) Impact of tissue kinetic heterogeneity on PET quantification: case study with the L-[1-11C]leucine PET method for cerebral protein synthesis rates.  Scientific Reports 8:931.  See supplement for modification of voxel-based algorithm at DOI:10.1038/s41598-017-18890-x.
6. Tomasi G, Veronese M, Bertoldo A, Smith CB, Schmidt KC.  Effects of shortened scanning intervals on calculated regional rates of cerebral protein synthesis determined with the L-[1-11C]leucine PET method (2018).  PLOS ONE [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0195580](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0195580) April 16, 2018.
7. Tomasi G, Veronese M, Bertoldo A, Smith CB, Schmidt KC. Substitution of venous for arterial blood sampling in the determination of regional rates of cerebral protein synthesis with L-[1-11C]leucine PET: A validation study (2019) 39(9):1849–1863, DOI: 10.1177/0271678X18771242.

### Effects of propofol anesthesia on rates of cerebral protein synthesis

The purpose of this study was to determine the effects of 2,3-diisopropylphenol (propofol) anesthesia on rates of Cerebral Protein Synthesis (rCPS). We studied 10 healthy young male volunteers who each underwent two L-[1-11C]leucine PET studies: awake and anesthetized with propofol. Our measurements showed no significant effects of propofol anesthesia on values of rCPS in all examined regions (Reference 1).

References:

1. Bishu S, Schmidt KC, Burlin TV, Channing MA, Horowitz L, Huang T-J, Liu Z-H, Qin M, Vuong B-K, Unterman A, Xia Z, Zametkin A, Herscovitch P, Quezado Z, Smith CB (2009)  Propofol anesthesia does not alter regional rates of cerebral protein synthesis measured with L-[1-11C]leucine and PET in healthy male subjects.  J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 29:1035-1047.

### Rates of cerebral protein synthesis and memory formation during sleep

If protein synthesis during sleep is required for sleep-dependent memory consolidation, we might expect rates of cerebral protein synthesis (rCPS) to increase during sleep in the local brain circuits that support performance on a particular task following training on that task. In this study (Reference 1), in order to measure circuit-specific brain protein synthesis during a daytime nap opportunity, we used the L-[1-11C]leucine positron emission tomography (PET) method with simultaneous polysomnography. We trained subjects on the visual texture discrimination task (TDT). This was followed by a nap opportunity during the PET scan, and we retested them later in the day after the scan. The TDT is considered retinotopically specific, so we hypothesized that higher rCPS in primary visual cortex would be observed in the trained hemisphere compared to the untrained hemisphere in subjects who were randomized to a sleep condition. Our results indicate that the changes in rCPS in primary visual cortex depended on whether subjects were in the wakefulness or sleep condition but were independent of the side of the visual field trained. That is, only in the subjects randomized to sleep, rCPS in the right primary visual cortex was higher than the left regardless of side trained. Other brain regions examined were not so affected. In the subjects who slept, performance on the TDT improved similarly regardless of the side trained. Results indicate a regionally selective and sleep-dependent effect that occurs with improved performance on the TDT.

References:

1. 1.Picchioni D, Schmidt KC, McWhirter KK, Loutaev I, Pavletic AJ, Speer AM, Zametkin AJ, Miao N, Bishu S, Turetsky KM, Morrow AS, Nadel JL, Evans BC, Vesselinovitch DM, Sheeler CA, Balkin TJ, Smith CB (2018).  Rates of cerebral protein synthesis in primary visual cortex during sleep-dependent memory consolidation, a study in human subjects.   Sleep  2018:1-17, DOI: 10.1093/sleep/zsy088

### Rates of cerebral protein synthesis in stages of sleep

During sleep, reduced brain energy demands provide an opportunity for biosynthetic processes like protein synthesis.  Sleep is required for some forms of memory consolidation, and memory consolidation requires de novo protein synthesis.  We measured regional cerebral protein synthesis rates (rCPS) in human subjects to ascertain how brain protein synthesis is affected during sleep.  Subjects underwent three consecutive L-[1-11C]leucine PET scans with simultaneous polysomnography: 1.rested awake, 2.sleep-deprived awake, 3.sleep.  Measured rCPS were similar across the three conditions.   Variations in sleep stage times during sleep scans were used to estimate rCPS in sleep stages under the assumption that measured rCPS is the weighted sum of rCPS in each sleep stage, with weights reflecting time and availability of C-11 leucine in sleep stage.  Across regions, estimated rCPS in combined stages N1 and N2 were 7-28% higher and estimated rCPS in N3 were similar to rCPS measured in sleep-deprived awake scans. Results demonstrate increased rates of protein synthesis linked to sleep (Reference 1).  

References:

1. Picchioni D, Schmidt KC, Loutaev I, Pavletic AJ, Bishu S, Balkin TJ, Smith CB (submitted) Increased rates of brain protein synthesis during [N1, N2] sleep: L-[1-11C]leucine PET studies in human subjects. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab.

### Rates of cerebral protein synthesis in subjects with fragile X syndrome

Fragile X syndrome (FXS) is the most common inherited cause of intellectual disability.  Fragile X mental retardation protein, a putative translation suppressor, is significantly reduced in FXS.   The prevailing hypothesis is that rates of cerebral protein synthesis (rCPS) are increased by the absence of this regulatory protein. We have previously reported increased rCPS in the Fmr1 knockout mouse model of FXS.  To address the hypothesis in human subjects, we applied the L [1-11C]leucine PET method to measure rCPS in adults with FXS  and healthy controls.  

#### Studies in conscious subjects

In previous studies we had used sedation during imaging (References 1 and 2) and we did not find increases in rCPS as had been seen in the mouse model.  Since mouse measurements were conducted in awake animals, we considered the possibility that sedation may have confounded our results.  In this study (Reference 3) we used a modified and validated PET protocol that made it easier for participants with FXS to undergo the study awake. We compared rCPS in 10 fragile X participants and 16 healthy controls all studied while awake.  Contrary to the prevailing hypothesis and findings in Fmr1 knockout mice, results indicate that rCPS in awake participants with FXS are decreased in whole brain and most brain regions by 13-21% compared to healthy controls.

#### Studies in subjects under dexmedetomidine anesthesia

In this study (Reference 2) all subjects were males between the ages of 18 and 24 years and free of psychotropic medication.  As most fragile X participants were not able to undergo the PET study awake, we used dexmedetomidine for sedation during the imaging studies.  We found no differences between rCPS measured during dexmedetomidine-sedation and the awake state in ten healthy controls.  In the comparison of rCPS in dexmedetomidine-sedated fragile X participants (n=9) and healthy controls (n=14) we found no statistically significant differences.  These results in human subjects do not support the findings in animal models that rCPS are elevated in the absence of FMRP.  

References:

1. Bishu S, Schmidt KC, Burlin TV, Channing MA, Horowitz L, Huang T-J, Liu Z-H, Qin M, Vuong B-K, Unterman A, Xia Z, Zametkin A, Herscovitch P, Quezado Z, Smith CB (2009)  Propofol anesthesia does not alter regional rates of cerebral protein synthesis measured with L-[1-11C]leucine and PET in healthy male subjects.  J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 29:1035-1047.
2. Schmidt KC, Loutaev I, Quezado Z, Sheeler C, Smith CB. Regional rates of brain protein synthesis are unaltered in dexmedetomidine sedated young men with fragile X syndrome: a L-[1-11C]leucine PET study (2020) Neurobiology of Disease 143: 104978
3. Schmidt KC, Loutaev I, Burlin TV, Thrum A, Sheeler C, Smith CB (2022) Decreased rates of cerebral protein synthesis in conscious young adults with fragile X syndrome demonstrated by L-[1-11C]leucine PET.  J Cereb Blood Flow Metab, Published online March 29, 2022. [https://doi.org/10.1177/0271678X221090997](https://doi.org/10.1177/0271678X221090997)
