# Rates of cerebral protein synthesis in subjects with fragile X syndrome

Fragile X syndrome (FXS) is the most common inherited cause of intellectual disability. Fragile X mental retardation protein, a putative translation suppressor, is significantly reduced in FXS. The prevailing hypothesis is that rates of cerebral protein synthesis (rCPS) are increased by the absence of this regulatory protein. We have previously reported increased rCPS in the Fmr1 knockout mouse model of FXS. To address the hypothesis in human subjects, we applied the L [1-11C]leucine PET method to measure rCPS in adults with FXS and healthy controls.

## Studies in conscious subjects

In previous studies we had used sedation during imaging (References 1 and 2) and we did not find increases in rCPS as had been seen in the mouse model. Since mouse measurements were conducted in awake animals, we considered the possibility that sedation may have confounded our results. In studies in conscious subjects (Reference 3) we used a modified and validated PET protocol that made it easier for participants with FXS to undergo the study awake. We compared rCPS in 10 fragile X participants and 16 healthy controls all studied while awake. Contrary to the prevailing hypothesis and findings in Fmr1 knockout mice, results indicate that rCPS in awake participants with FXS are decreased in whole brain and most brain regions by 13-21% compared to healthy controls.

## Studies in subjects under dexmedetomidine anesthesia

In studies in subjects under dexmedetomidine anesthesia (Reference 2) all subjects were males between the ages of 18 and 24 years and free of psychotropic medication. As most fragile X participants were not able to undergo the PET study awake, we used dexmedetomidine for sedation during the imaging studies. We found no differences between rCPS measured during dexmedetomidine-sedation and the awake state in ten healthy controls. In the comparison of rCPS in dexmedetomidine-sedated fragile X participants (n=9) and healthy controls (n=14) we found no statistically significant differences. These results in human subjects do not support the findings in animal models that rCPS are elevated in the absence of FMRP.

## Measurement of rates of cerebral protein synthesis (rCPS) in human subjects

The L-[1-11C]leucine PET method for measurement of regional rates of cerebral protein synthesis (rCPS) in human subjects is based on the in-vivo autoradiographic method for measurement of rCPS in animals (Reference 4). The method utilizes dynamic PET scanning with concurrent arterial blood sampling. A kinetic modeling approach is used to account for the dilution of the specific activity of the tissue precursor amino acid pool for protein synthesis with amino acids, largely unlabeled, that come from the steady state breakdown of protein in the tissue; these amino acids are a significant source of leucine in brain. The method was validated in rhesus monkeys (Reference 5). In the first human studies the method was demonstrated to produce low variance and highly reproducible measures of rCPS (Reference 6). Early studies utilized region of interest kinetic model analyses; a voxel-based approach was subsequently developed (References 7 and 8, see Reference 8's supplement for modification of voxel-based algorithm). In addition to reducing the effects of tissue kinetic heterogeneity on calculations of rCPS, the voxel-based approach allows the construction of parametric rCPS images.

The scanning procedure used in the originally developed method proved too difficult for subjects with intellectual disabilities to tolerate without sedation. To make it easier for these participants to tolerate the procedure while awake, modified methods were developed and validated to shorten the scanning interval (Reference 9) and substitute venous for arterial blood sampling (Reference 10).

Included in the current dataset are L-[1-11C]leucine 4D PET emission images, co-registered MR images, blood sampling data, and parametric rCPS images.

## References

1. Bishu, S., Schmidt, K. C., Burlin, T. V., Charming, M. A., Horowitz, L., Huang, T., Liu, Z., Qin, M., Vuong, B.-K., Unterman, A. J., Xia, Z., Zametkin, A., Herscovitch, P., Quezado, Z., & Smith, C. B. (2009). Propofol Anesthesia Does Not Alter Regional Rates of Cerebral Protein Synthesis Measured with l -[1- 11 C]Leucine and PET in Healthy Male Subjects. Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism, 29(5), 1035–1047. [https://doi.org/10.1038/jcbfm.2009.7](https://doi.org/10.1038/jcbfm.2009.7)

2. Schmidt, K. C., Loutaev, I., Quezado, Z., Sheeler, C., & Smith, C. B. (2020). Regional rates of brain protein synthesis are unaltered in dexmedetomidine sedated young men with fragile X syndrome: A L-[1-11C]leucine PET study. Neurobiology of Disease, 143, 104978. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nbd.2020.104978](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nbd.2020.104978)

3. Schmidt, K. C., Loutaev, I., Burlin, T. V., Thurm, A., Sheeler, C., & Smith, C. B. (2022). Decreased rates of cerebral protein synthesis in conscious young adults with fragile X syndrome demonstrated by L-[1- 11 C]leucine PET. Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism, 42(9), 1666–1675. [https://doi.org/10.1177/0271678X221090997](https://doi.org/10.1177/0271678X221090997)

4. Schmidt, K. C., Cook, M. P., Qin, M., Kang, J., Burlin, T. V., & Smith, C. B. (2005). Measurement of Regional Rates of Cerebral Protein Synthesis with L-[1- 11 C]Leucine and PET with Correction for Recycling of tissue amino acids: I. Kinetic Modeling Approach. Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism, 25(5), 617–628. [https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.jcbfm.9600067](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.jcbfm.9600067)

5. Smith, C. B., Schmidt, K. C., Qin, M., Burlin, T. V., Cook, M. P., Kang, J., Saunders, R. C., Bacher, J. D., Carson, R. E., Channing, M. A., Eckelman, W. C., Herscovitch, P., Laverman, P., & Vuong, B.-K. (2005). Measurement of Regional Rates of Cerebral Protein Synthesis with L-[1- 11 C]leucine and PET with Correction for Recycling of Tissue Amino Acids: II. Validation in Rhesus Monkeys. Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism, 25(5), 629–640. [https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.jcbfm.9600066](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.jcbfm.9600066)

6. Bishu, S., Schmidt, K. C., Burlin, T., Channing, M., Conant, S., Huang, T., Liu, Z., Qin, M., Unterman, A., Xia, Z., Zametkin, A., Herscovitch, P., & Smith, C. B. (2008). Regional Rates of Cerebral Protein Synthesis Measured with l -[1- 11 C]Leucine and PET in Conscious, Young Adult Men: Normal Values, Variability, and Reproducibility. Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism, 28(8), 1502–1513. [https://doi.org/10.1038/jcbfm.2008.43](https://doi.org/10.1038/jcbfm.2008.43)

7. Tomasi, G., Bertoldo, A., Bishu, S., Unterman, A., Smith, C. B., & Schmidt, K. C. (2009). Voxel-Based Estimation of Kinetic Model Parameters of the l -[1- 11 C]Leucine PET Method for Determination of Regional Rates of Cerebral Protein Synthesis: Validation and Comparison with Region-of-Interest-Based Methods. Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism, 29(7), 1317–1331. [https://doi.org/10.1038/jcbfm.2009.52](https://doi.org/10.1038/jcbfm.2009.52)

8. Veronese, M., Bertoldo, A., Tomasi, G., Smith, C. B., & Schmidt, K. C. (2018). Impact of tissue kinetic heterogeneity on PET quantification: case study with the L-[1-11C]leucine PET method for cerebral protein synthesis rates. Scientific Reports, 8(1), 931. [https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-18890-x](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-18890-x)

9. Tomasi, G., Veronese, M., Bertoldo, A., Beebe Smith, C., & Schmidt, K. C. (2018). Effects of shortened scanning intervals on calculated regional rates of cerebral protein synthesis determined with the L-[1-11C]leucine PET method. PLOS ONE, 13(4), e0195580. [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0195580](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0195580)

10. Tomasi, G., Veronese, M., Bertoldo, A., Smith, C. B., & Schmidt, K. C. (2019). Substitution of venous for arterial blood sampling in the determination of regional rates of cerebral protein synthesis with L-[1- 11 C]leucine PET: A validation study. Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism, 39(9), 1849–1863. [https://doi.org/10.1177/0271678X18771242](https://doi.org/10.1177/0271678X18771242)
